# Film Adaptations of Video Games

## Introduction
In more recent years, there has been a surge in popularity of video games receiving movie adaptations. Such films, like Sonic the Hedgehog, Detective Pikachu, and The Super Mario Bros. Movie have all garnered massive amounts of popularity and high consumer ratings as well as done very well in the box office. Historically however, this has not always been the case as many video game film adaptations usually flop in ratings and in sales; not to mention the fact that video game films were not very common, usually only appearing every so often. With that being said my question is this: what film distributor(s) are responsible for the best/worst rated and highest/lowest selling video game films and why exactly are these types of films becoming more frequent in today’s movie industry? How can we best visualize this growth in popularity of this movie genre?

## Initial Iteration: Effect of Rising Video Game Popularity
It’s no surprise that video games are much more common nowadays then they have ever been before and it would not be a far cry to even call them a household staple. This in part answers why these film adaptations are becoming more popular alongside the fact that advancing technologies are making it easier to create these fictional worlds in film. 
So what can be said about the film distributors behind the making of these films and how can we visualize their relationship with the performance of their respective productions? I think a good place to start would be to compare older film performances to newer film performances just to get a better understanding of how much of a role video game popularity played in the overall performance of their film adaptations. In order to categorize “old” vs “new”, I’ll choose 2011 as the threshold year with films before 2011 classified as old and films after 2011 classified as new. I’m choosing 2011 as the threshold year because it was around this time period that major media sites that could promote the popularity of video games more than ever before, like YouTube and Twitch, really became mainstream sources of gaming content and news. 
In order to visualize this, I think using a bubble chart could do a wonderful job for my dataset. I believe this because a bubble chart can represent three different variables in a single chart, one for x axis (time), y axis (audience score), and area (box office). Although area for box office would be my only concern as viewers often have a harder time perceiving area as quantitative data than other measurements like length. In order to adjust for this weakness, I believe it is necessary to include text on or near each bubble that shows the total box office, or to make my chart interactive so that viewers can hover their cursor over each bubble to see a tooltip showing the box office of that bubble. This visualization would look something like this: 
The graph turns out just as I had thought it would! After 2011 and the beginning of mainstream sharing of video game content through platforms like YouTube and Twitch, video game film adaptations are subject to much better audience scores and box office profits (for some). Not to mention the films per year ratio is about the same with the older film period yielding about 1.29 films per year while the newer film period yields 1.3 films per year. However it should be noted that the frequency of films being output in the newer film period is higher as their time period is only 10 years long (2011-2021), while the older film period is 17 years long (1993-2010). 
As I mentioned before, area perception is harder for viewers to measure quantitative data with and that is no different from this bubble chart. Therefore, I added a graph interactivity that allows viewers to scroll over each bubble and see the box office profits, as well as release year, and the title of the film with ease:

## Initial Iteration: Feedback
When I showed this iteration of my visualization to viewers, I first asked them the question “What do you think this graph is trying to show you?”. Based on the title alone most viewers could easily tell me that the graph was trying to show them the performance of old vs new video game film adaptations over the years. They understood that the y-axis value was Rotten Tomatoes scores, but it wasn’t initially clear to them what the size of each bubble actually represented. This can easily be fixed by adding a clarification in the title or the legend in my next iteration. Also, viewers don’t necessarily know that the visualization is interactive without me having to tell them so I think I could do better here as well to add some text that clarifies that.
I then asked viewers “What are the differences you can see between old films and new films?”. To this most responded that it was obvious to see that the quality of film had significantly increased for newer films, as only one old film had a Rotten Tomatoes score above 40 whereas there are 5 above 40 for newer films. They also reported seeing that newer films generally had a higher box office score than most older films. 
With that, one more thing I want to mention is that although this chart performed really well on the first iteration, it still lacks insights on the film distributor(s) who’re pumping these movies out, what their profits are, and whether or not the films they make are quality or just attempts at cash-grabs. I think the easiest and most efficient way of accomplishing this type of graph is to make a complimentary multi set bar chart and add it to my bubble chart visualization as a small multiple. This way I can have a set of bars for each film distributor that can quantify box profits alongside their film’s Rotten Tomatoes audience score and total number of films produced. While it’s also possible to do this using a radial bar chart or radial column chart, the multi set bar chart is the best choice because the curvature in these two alternative charts can make the graph harder to read, although I do like the aesthetic look they possess. 

## Secondary Iteration: Adding a Small Multiple 
The second iteration of my visualization looks like such after considering the feedback received from the prior iteration:
The most obvious change in this iteration from the last iteration is the inclusion of a complimentary multi set bar chart at the bottom of the bubble chart as a small multiple. In this chart, every distributor is assigned a set of three different bars representing Worldwide box office profits in green, Rotten Tomatoes audience scores in orange, and the total number of titles that that film distributor has produced in gray. I believe that this will add meaningful insights about the distributors behind these film adaptations, allowing viewers to know just how much profit is made by each one and whether or not the produced films are well-received by the audience or just an attempt at cash-grabs. 
Additionally, another small change I made were improvements to the titles of both charts. This way viewers should know without being told that the graphs are interactive and that, specifically in the bubble chart, that the areas of each circle represents how that film did at the box office. Here's an example of the multi set bar chart’s hovering interactivity:

## Second Iteration: Feedback
When I showed the second iteration of my visualization to viewers, I first asked them again about the bubble chart, “What does the size of each circle represent?”, just to make sure that there was no longer any confusion concerning what variables were being represented. Most likely because it was now in the title of the chart, every single viewer correctly answered that it represented global box office. I then moved on to the multi set bar chart, asking viewers “What film distributor makes the most money off of video game film adaptations?”. Again every viewer correctly answered that Sony Pictures Entertainment was the highest grossing film distributor for this movie genre. 
I then asked viewers a question about the bar chart that I think I failed to successfully visualize in this iteration of my visualization, “What film distributor earns the best audience scores per film?”. Many viewers were not able to answer and to be completely honest I never really set them up to succeed here. This question is moreso one that I myself wanted to answer in my next iteration and I just wanted to see if viewers could guess correctly beforehand; the viewers that did answer guessed either Sony Pictures Entertainment or Warner Bros. Pictures, likely because their bars are the longest. 
Other than adjusting for audience score per title, I also believe that organizing my multi set bar chart in descending order of global box office is a good idea for my next iteration. This is because many of the lower grossing distributors in my chart are a little hard to distinguish as to who has a higher box office profit. Therefore setting up my chart with this descending order will make it easier to read going forward.

## Third Iteration: Final Adjustments
The third iteration of my visualization after making these final adjustments in response to feedback looks like this:
Easily the most noticeable change between this iteration and the last one is the altered order of the multi set bar graph. The chart is now arranged in descending order of Worldwide box office which I believe gives viewers a visualization that is much more readable than the one priors; viewers should now be able to easily distinguish between distributors who’ve made the most money, distributors whose films have performed the worst, and distributors who have created films that were well received by the audience, even if they didn’t turn a large profit at the box office. It should also be noted that, the “Total tiles” section from the last iteration has been replaced with the “Score per # of titles” section. I created this section because I believed that Score per title is a good distinguisher of whether film distributors are creating quality films that audiences enjoy or just attempting to cash in on the brand name of a popular video game or video game character. With this section, my hope is that viewers will realize that if a film distributor's box office profits are high but scores per title is low, then that film distributor is likely just trying to cash in instead of producing a faithful representation of the source material. 
Furthermore, another change made to the multi set bar chart was that the title now includes the fact that the chart is ordered in descending order of Worldwide box office to avoid any type of confusion. Titles and axis labels, as I have learned from last project and even more so from this one go so far to describe the little details that often get overlooked when making these charts. Making sure every single detail about the chart is included in the chart in one way or another goes a long way towards making the visualization easier to understand. 

## Third Iteration: Viewer Response
Because I was happy with the responses I had gotten from previous iterations of my visualization for the bubble chart, I moved on to directly ask questions about my multi set bar chart. The first question that I asked viewers this time around was the same question they could only guess on for the last iteration, “What film distributor earns the best audience scores per film?”. This time around, as expected, every viewer was able to see that IFC Films had the highest gray bar and answered accordingly. Then, I proceeded to ask them, “Which distributor amongst the top five with the highest box office profits produced the least liked films?”. I did this in order to figure out whether they could tell which film distributor was the biggest cash-grab, hoping that they’d all answer 20th Century Fox who had an overall score per title of 11. Unfortunately, viewers seemed to be split in their answers between 20th Century Fox and Universal Pictures when I asked. This is most likely because although 20th Century Fox’s score per title bar was lower than Universal Pictures’, Universal Pictures’ overall Rotten Tomatoes bar was lower than 20th Century Fox’s. Therefore, viewers weren’t exactly sure which way to vote on unanimously. If I had the time to create a 4th iteration, removing the Rotten Tomatoes bar would easily be the most notable adjustment as I feel the score per title bar is a much better overall indicator of whether or not a distributor's films are overall quality over quantity. 
Lastly, I asked viewers, “Which distributor do you think created the worst performing film(s)?”. For this question, I expected viewers to either answer with the distributor on the far right, Vivendi Entertainment who made the least amount of box office profits, or Lionsgate Films who had a single film who’s audience score was 1, yet still turned a sizable profit. It would’ve been easy to ask them “Which distributor made the least amount of money?” or “Which distributor had the worst score per film?” as they could just look at the length of bars and obtain an easy answer. By asking them about who they thought created the worst performing films, I’d be able to glean from them what they thought was more important to a film’s performance, that is do they see a profitable film or a highly rated film as a better performing film? After asking my viewers that question, their answers were pretty evenly split between Lionsgate and Vivendi Entertainment with a slight favor towards Lionsgate Films creating the worse movie(s). Although I did not have that many viewers' opinions to go off of, it can be concluded that from the viewers I asked that they slightly viewed rating as a better indicator of film performance than total box office. 

## Conclusion
To conclude, I reached the final iteration of my visualization by first brainstorming ideas about why and how video game film adaptations are becoming increasingly popular in today’s film industry and whether or not the film distributors behind the films were creating good performance films or trying to cash a check on a well-known game franchise. I then reasoned that a big contributor for this popularity would be the rise of the internet and mainstream video streaming services such as YouTube and Twitch. From here, I then proceeded to create a bubble chart as I felt it was most appropriate for handling three different variables to visualize the rise of this genre of film's popularity by separating them into two different categories, old and new, using 2011 as the threshold year. Overall, the bubble chart was well received by viewers and needed little iteration other than some labeling changes. After the bubble chart I added a complimentary multi set bar chart to give insights on the film distributors and their film’s performances. The problem with the first iteration of this complimentary chart however was that its “Total Titles” section was not that informative to viewers and that having the distributors in an ambiguous order made the chart harder to read. To address this, I replaced the “Total Titles” section with a “Score per # of titles” section to give better insights into performance and also switched the order of the distributors to be in descending order of Worldwide box office profits for easier viewing. Overall this iteration of the chart was received well by viewers, however they had issues identifying whether the “Rotten Tomatoes” or “Score per # of titles” section was a better indicator of distributor film performance, which I would’ve addressed in a prospective fourth iteration. It was also learned that viewers had a slight preference towards audience ratings being a better indicator for film performance than box office profits. 
